Beginnings & Glory

GETTING STARTED
One player is the Referee. They should read through to the end of the rules section (p21).
The other players can go straight to the Knighthood page opposite and need not read any further unless curious.

START & SCOPE
Every group that sits down to play the game is different, and you should consider the Start and Scope of a game before you begin.
The Start is the opening situation in which the players find themselves. The Scope is how long you expect the game to run for, both in and out of game.

START
Wanderer - Young Knights-Errant with d6GD (Guard) and d12+d6 in each Virtue. They arrive in the Realm seeking Glory. If they lack direction, have them seek a Seer’s counsel.

Courtier - Mature Knights-Gallant with 2d6GD and d12+6 (six, not d6) in each Virtue. They have a place in Court at the Seat of Power. The first Omen of the nearest Myth is delivered as news to the Court.

Ruler - Mature Knights-Tenant with d6+6GD and d12+6 (six, not d6) in each Virtue. One Knight rules a Holding, the others are in their Circle. The Seat of Power is under a wicked influence.

SCOPES
Adventure - One session. Here it can save time to generate a few Knights ahead of the game and let the players choose one each.

Chronicle - A known number of sessions. Season and Age turns are planned out ahead of time. For six sessions this might be a Season turn at the end of each session, and an Age turn at the end of each Winter.

Saga - An indeterminate number of sessions. Here you can let the players guide the scope as they explore the world.

GLORY
All Knights seek Glory, that they might one day be deemed worthy of the City Quest.

GLORY THROUGH MYTHS
When the group feels that a Myth has been resolved, reaching a conclusion of any type, all Knights who played a part in that Myth gain 1 Glory.

GLORY BY OTHER MEANS
In a public duel or joust, Knights may stake Glory against a willing opponent. The victor gains 1 Glory, the loser loses 1 Glory.
Tournaments may also grant 1 Glory to the winning Knight, provided there are significant spectators and spectacle.
If a battle is large enough to be remembered in history, all Knights on the victorious side gain 1 Glory.
When the game moves to a new Age all Knights gain 1 Glory through serving the Realm and manoeuvring in Court.

RANK
A Knight’s Glory dictates their rank:
0 Glory - Knight-Errant
Worthy of leading a Warband

3 Glory - Knight-Gallant
Worthy of a seat in Council or Court

6 Glory - Knight-Tenant
Worthy of ruling a Holding

9 Glory - Knight-Dominant
Worthy of ruling a Seat of Power

12 Glory - Knight-Radiant
Worthy of the City Quest

WORTHINESS
Rank alone does not immediately grant the Knight a Council position or rule of a Holding. It merely proves their worthiness.
A Knight may find themselves in a position for which their rank is unworthy. They are sure to face initial opposition, but if this can be overcome then their worthiness is proven.