Sites

A Knight’s journey largely focuses on travelling great distances to seek the guidance of Seers and uncover Myths.
However, on occasion there may be the need to zoom in on a single Hex, or a specific site within a Hex, in more detail.
Sites can be created as areas that warrant more detailed exploration, whether ancient tombs, hostile castles, twisting caverns, or misty woods spanning the entire Hex.
While they can be plotted out with any number of traditional methods, this is a quick Hex-based method.

POINTS AND ROUTES
1. Draw 6 points as the corners of a hexagon, with a 7th in the centre.
a. Mark 3 points with circles. These are features that give information or set the mood.
b. Mark 2 with triangles. These are dangers to be navigated carefully.
c. Mark 1 with a diamond. This is treasure, a useful or valuable find.
d. Erase the final point and assign numbers to the remaining points.

2. Neighbouring points can be connected by three types of route.
a. Draw 3 open routes with a solid line. These are straightforward paths between points.
b. Draw 2 closed routes with a crossed line. Here something blocks the way, so creative thinking is required.
c. Draw 1 hidden route with a dotted line. This path is only found through specific exploration of its connecting points or local knowledge.

3. Make sure all points can be reached, even if one of the routes is closed or secret.
4. If applicable, place an entrance in any point, and an optional hidden entrance.

EXAMPLE - Blackmoss Isle
1 Stony beach overgrown with toxic black moss. Dead rock pools, smashed boat.
2 A tattered rope bridge over jagged rocks. Carrion Gulls harass travellers, hoping to secure their next meal.
3 A concealed harbour. A hidden cave leads to 6. The passageway to 4 is overgrown with toxic black moss.
4 A former shrine to the sea, overgrown with black moss. Now the tomb of the Salt Seer.
5 A waterlogged cave, swirling currents sweep away anybody not secured. Tunnel to 6 is flooded by raging waters.
6 The Salt Seer’s hoard. Valuable treasures and his Eye of the Sea.
Entrance: A small cove, a safe landing spot on the island.
Hidden Entrance: Locals know of a second landing, requiring careful piloting through rocks and caves.

BREAKING THE RULES
The guidelines on this page are just a starting point. Rearrange the distribution of the types of point, route, and entrance if it suits the theme of the site better.
So a sealed burial complex might have:
Points: 3 Treasures, 2 Dangers, 1 Feature
Routes: 3 Closed, 2 Secret, 1 Open
Entrances: 1 Entrance only