Basic Rules

SAVES
To pass a Save, roll a d20 equal or below the relevant Virtue. Failure means negative consequences, not always a failed action.

VIRTUES
Virtues can be reduced and raised in a number of ways, but can never go higher than 19 or lower than 0.

TURNS
A turn is enough time to Move and then perform an Action, always in that order.

SURPRISE
Players normally take the first turn of combat, discussing their plan and acting in any order they wish.
Characters who were not readied for combat must pass a CLA Save or miss the first turn.

REACTION
Non-player characters react in a way that feels appropriate for the current context. When uncertain, a character makes a SPI Save to avoid an unfavourable reaction.

EXPOSED
Characters who are caught with their guard down or otherwise defenceless are Exposed and act as if they have 0GD. If they remedy their situation then they are no longer Exposed. Traps and ambushes typically catch victims Exposed.

FEATS
These special actions known by Knights can be performed as described (p10). Using Feats risks the Knight becoming Fatigued which prevents them from using further Feats until they rest.

DEATH
Even the boldest Knight can die a sudden or ignoble death. Prepare yourself for this.
When a Knight dies the player creates a new Knight and they are added to the Company as quickly as possible. Alternatively they may assume control of a Squire or follower.

ATTACKS
Take the Attack dice noted on your weapon(s), shield, and granted by bonuses.
Go through the following steps in order:
1. All combatants attacking the same target roll their dice at the same time.
2. If the target or their nearby allies can Deny (p10) they may use it.
3. Attackers may perform Gambits (p10).
4. Take the highest die remaining.
5. Add any extra Damage from attackers who are Bolstering the Attack (p10).
6. Subtract the target’s total Armour score.
7. The Attack causes that much Damage.

So a Knight with a mace (d8) and shield (d4) is aided by an ally with 2 daggers (d6 each). They roll d8 and d4, and 2d6 respectively. The dice show 7, 3, 1, and 5. The highest die is 7. The 5 is spent on a Gambit to Bolster the Damage to 8. The target has Armour 2 (helm and shield), reducing the Damage to 6.
Impaired attacks roll d4 only and cannot gain bonus dice or benefit from Feats.
Blast attacks target everybody in their area, rolling each separately.

DAMAGE
The attack’s Damage is deducted from the target’s GD.
If they have at least 1GD remaining then they Evade the Attack.
If it leaves them with exactly 0GD then they gain a Scar (p9).
If it exceeds the target’s GD, the excess is deducted from VIG and they are Wounded.
If they lose half or more of their remaining VIG it is a Mortal Wound. Mortally Wounded targets are down and dying. They die if left untended for an hour, but can be patched up in a few moments.
If Damage reduces the target’s VIG to 0, they are Slain.