Travel

Travelling consumes a whole Phase of the day and uses one of 3 methods:
• Trek: 1 Hex on foot or steed.
• Gallop: 2 Hexes on a non-Exhausted steed. The steed loses d6 VIG.
• Cruise: 3 Hexes by boat, or by steed on a rarely-found proper road.

When ending a phase in Wilderness, roll:
WILDERNESS ROLL
1 Encounter the next Omen from a random Myth in this Realm.
2-3 Encounter the next Omen from the nearest Myth.
4-6 Encounter the Hex’s Landmark. Otherwise all clear.

HOSPITALITY
When sleeping indoors, do not make a Wilderness Roll. Manners dictate that hospitality be granted to travelling Knights. Longer stays warrant a favour in return.

CAMPING
When sleeping outdoors make a Wilderness Roll as normal, ignoring Landmarks. Hostile Omens prevent proper sleep, while others may not occur at all if they are improbable as nighttime activity.

SUPPLIES
Knights gather food, water, and firewood as they travel, so these are not tracked. In situations where essential needs are deprived the Company each lose d6 VIG each morning.

NIGHT
Travelling or exploring at night causes the Company to lose d6 SPI each. If they lack a guide and light they are also travelling blind.

SLEEP
Each morning, all who did not get proper sleep the previous day lose d6 CLA.

WINTER
Anybody camping or travelling at night in Winter loses d6 VIG. Most Realms also risk dire weather during Winter (see opposite).

OMENS
Each Myth has 6 Omens, listed in the order in which they are encountered. The first encounter with a specific Myth is always Omen 1, the second Omen 2 etc.
Remember primacy of action (p16). If the players want to hunt for the Wyvern’s nest they don’t have to wait for that Omen to appear if they take action themselves.

MYTH HEXES
Ending a phase in the Hex containing a Myth always reveals its next Omen without making a Wilderness Roll. When possible, the Knights also get the drop on the Omen.

BARRIERS
Travel through a Barrier is not normally possible, though locals might know a way. Attempting to travel through a Barrier wastes that Phase of the day, but still causes a Wilderness Roll.

OTHER TRAVELLING TABLES
Travellers who find themselves roaming without a proper sense of direction, or shrouded by darkness or mist, must roll when they try to move to a new Hex.

TRAVELLING BLIND
1 Circle back to where you started.
2-3 Drift a Hex to the Left (2) or Right (3).
4-6 Progress as planned.

When travelling in lands at the mercy of dire weather, roll at the start of each Phase.
DIRE WEATHER
1 Dire weather. You can’t leave the Hex and can’t get proper sleep.
2-3 Looming threat. If this is rolled a second consecutive time, treat as dire weather.
4-6 Fine weather for travel.

When arriving in a Holding, roll to gauge the local mood.
LOCAL MOOD
1 Occupied by a looming or recent woe.
2-3 There is a sense of things in decline.
4-6 A fine mood and all seems well enough.