Dominion

RULING A DOMAIN
In return for pledging loyalty to the Seat of Power, a Holding might be granted to a Knight or influential Vassal. This forms a Domain. Wilderness Hexes and their Landmarks formally fall under the dominion of their nearest Holding.

THE COUNCIL
Prestigious seats must be filled for a Domain to run smoothly. Though you may grant and revoke these roles, those who are scorned rarely go quietly.
Steward: Ruling in your absence, carrying your authority and the key to the treasury.
Marshal: Training and equipping soldiers, mustering them in times of war.
Sheriff: Monitoring threats within your Realm and even within your walls.
Envoy: Managing neighbours and providing hospitality to visitors.
The Circle: Rulers often invite worthy visiting Knights to sit alongside the Council as equals, an ancient tradition.
Members of your Council can be assigned to tasks. Depending on the scope these could take a Phase, a Week, or a full Season. These are handled just as normal actions (p16), with failure typically causing a Crisis.

THE COURT
Those who serve outside the Council.
Retainers: Vassals taken on by individual Council members to aid in their work.
Courtiers: Commoners with lesser responsibilities or ceremonial honours, usually holding higher ambitions.
Petitioners: Representatives from outside of the Court, granted an audience to seek aid, counsel, or justice.
Seers: Although they live in their Sanctums they occasionally visit Court or send acolytes in their stead.

CRISES
Ruling a Domain is an exercise in ongoing disaster management.
At the start of a Season or when returning from a long absence, roll:
CRISIS ROLL
1 Calamity: Immediately gain 2 Crises.
2-3 Dilemma: Choose between 2 Crises.
4-6 Prosperity: Times are good.

Crises apply to the whole Domain, not a single character, and remain until resolved. They can be chosen by the Referee, or rolled:
1. Chaos - Lawlessness in the land. Resolution: Enforce a sense of justice.
2. Debt - Dire need of coffer and coin. Resolution: Restock the treasury.
3. Famine - Empty plates, empty fields. Resolution: Get food into the stores.
4. Misery - Vassals question why they toil. Resolution: Raise the spirits of the people.
5. Panic - The weak tremble with unease. Resolution: Ensure the Vassals feel safe.
6. Doubt - Seeds of betrayal against you. Resolution: Assert your authority to rule.

MISRULE
If a season ends with 3 or more unresolved Crises then the Domain goes into misrule. Vassals revolt, Knights leave, and pretenders move in on their claims.

CLAIMING A SEAT OF POWER
A Seat of Power carries similar problems to a Holding, elevated to a larger scale. Threats arise from within your Court, within your Realm, and from beyond your borders.