Harm & Scars

VIRTUE LOSS
Virtues may be reduced by means other than Damage, typically referred to as Virtue Loss.
In addition to the situations listed in the rules, characters may suffer Virtue Loss as the cost or consequence of an action. This is detailed in the Action Procedure (p16).
Victims are only Slain or Mortally Wounded if the Virtue was reduced by Damage, never as a result of Virtue Loss.
At VIG 0 you are Exhausted and cannot Attack if you have moved this turn.
At CLA 0 you are Exposed and treated as having 0GD.
At SPI 0 your attacks are Impaired rolling a single d4 only.

RECOVERY
Guard is fully restored with just a moment of peace after the danger has passed.
Fatigue is also removed this way.
Virtues can be fully restored by 3 means:
• Consuming a specific type of Remedy
• Performing a specific Action
• Skipping to a new Season
Vigour is restored by consuming Sustenance or spending a full day in warm hospitality.
Clarity is restored by consuming Stimulant or receiving guidance from a Seer.
Spirit is restored by consuming Sacrament or indulging a Passion.

REMEDIES
A single Remedy is a sizeable bundle of materials and tools. A person or dedicated beast of burden can only carry one at once.
Using a Remedy requires a whole Phase of the day, and is more about the ceremonial act than the material components themselves.
The Virtue is restored before resolving any Omens or other encounters. A single Remedy is enough to benefit all company present.

SCARS
Take the die that caused the Scar and roll it again, consulting the table below for the specific Scar caused.
Virtue Loss through Scars is not Damage, so cannot Mortally Wound or Slay the victim.
Scars are only gained through real, deadly combat, not training or bloodless duels.

SCAR
1 Distress – A lucky escape. Lose d6 SPI.
2 Disfigurement – A permanent mark. Roll 1d6: 1: Eye, 2: Cheek, 3: Neck, 4: Torso, 5: Nose, 6: Jaw. If your max GD is 2 or less, increase it by d6.
3 Smash – A sudden spray of blood. Lose d6 VIG.
4 Stun – Pain drowns the senses. Lose d6 CLA. If your max GD is 4 or less, increase it by d6.
5 Rupture – Innards pierced and compressed. Lose 2d6 VIG.
6 Gouge – Flesh torn from bone. When you get stitched up, if your max GD is 6 or less, increase it by d6.
7 Concussion – A heavy blow numbs the mind. Lose 2d6 CLA.
8 Tear – Something taken in violent struggle. Roll 1d6: 1: Nose, 2: Ear, 3: Finger, 4: Thumb, 5: Eye, 6: Chunk of Scalp. When you get patched up, if your max GD is 8 or less, increase it by d6.
9 Agony – With a crack, a torturous break. Lose 2d6 SPI.
10 Mutilation – A limb rendered lost or useless. Roll 1d6: 1-2: Leg, 3-4: Shield Arm, 5-6: Sword Arm. By next Season you have a prosthetic or have learned to get by, and if your max GD is 10 or less, increase it by d6.
11 Doom – A cheated death haunts you. If you take a Mortal Wound this Season you are Slain instead.
12 Humiliation – A most dolorous stroke. When you achieve revenge, if your max GD is 12 or less, increase it by d6.