Arms & Goods

TRADE
Only the rich deal in coins. Most trade is an exchange of raw materials, goods, or service.
Frequent trades often grow into ongoing pledges of service, cooperation, or protection.
Simply, if you hope to trade you should have a good answer to the question “What can I offer that they would value?”.
Common items are widely available.
Uncommon items require a specialist.
Rare items are truly treasured.

WIELDING WEAPONS
If no type is noted, assume the weapon uses one hand and has no other restrictions.
Hefty weapons require one hand. Only one Hefty item can be wielded at once.
Long weapons require both hands and are Impaired in confined environments.
Slow weapons cannot be used if the attacker has moved this turn. They are also Long.

COMMON WEAPONS
Hefty Tools: d6 hefty (pitchfork, hatchet)
Long Tools: d8 long (staff, logging axe, pick)
Hand Weapons: d6 (dagger, club, handaxe)
Hefty Weapons: d8 hefty (spear, mace, axe)
Long Weapons: d10 long (poleaxe, billhook)
Sling: d4 hefty
Javelin: d6 hefty
Shortbow: d6 long

UNCOMMON WEAPONS
Shortsword: 2d6
Lance: d10 long, count as hefty if mounted
Brutal Weapons: 2d10 slow (greataxe, maul)
Longbow: d8 slow

RARE WEAPONS
Longsword: 2d8 hefty
Greatsword: 2d10 long
Curvebow: 2d6 long
Crossbow: 2d8 slow

SPECIALIST WEAPONS
Take an existing common or uncommon weapon with +d8 or +d10 in a specific situation. Make it one category rarer.

WEARING ARMOUR
One of each armour type (coat, plates, helm, shield) can be worn at once, combining their armour scores together. Plates and helm are generally not worn outside of battle.

COMMON ARMOUR
Shield: d4, A1 (round, kite, heater)

UNCOMMON ARMOUR
Coat: A1 (mail, gambeson, flexible armour suitable for general wear or beneath plates)
Helm: A1 (kettle, nasal, bucket, coif)

RARE ARMOUR
Plates: A1 (cuirass, brigandine, splint, scale, rigid armour often worn over a coat, slow to remove or don, even with assistance)

TOOLS
Common Tools: Saw, fishing rod, sewing set, candles, shovel, flute
Uncommon Tools: Animal trap, smithing tools, herbalist kit, scribe set, lute
Rare Tools: Alchemy tools, crystal ball, extravagant harp

COMMON BEASTS
Hound: VIG 5, CLA 10, SPI 5, 4GD, d6 bite
Sheep or Pig: VIG 5, CLA 5, SPI 5, 1GD
Pony: VIG 7, CLA 7, SPI 5, 2GD
Mule: VIG 10, CLA 5, SPI 5, 1GD

UNCOMMON BEASTS
Ox: VIG 15, CLA 5, SPI 5, 3GD
Hawk: VIG 5, CLA 15, SPI 5, 4GD, d4 talons
Riding Steed: VIG 10, CLA 10, SPI 5, 3GD
Heavy Steed: VIG 15, CLA 5, SPI 5, 2GD

RARE BEASTS
Charger: VIG 10, CLA 5, SPI 5, 5GD, d8 trample

REMEDIES (All Uncommon)
Sustenance: The means for a generous feast. Used to recover VIG.
Stimulant: Enlightening herbal preparations. Used to recover CLA.
Sacrament: Props for a ritual or performance. Used to recover SPI.

POISONS
Common: Sickness and discomfort
Uncommon: Suffering, then slow death
Rare: Death plus speed, secrecy, or suffering```

***

### Page 13: People & Realms

```text
People & Realms

SERVICE
Holdings house a range of people who can be called on for service. The larger the Holding, the more likely that a particular service is being offered there.
Many will gladly offer their service to a Knight, but all have limits, after which they ask something in return or refuse entirely.
As with trade, the key question comes down to “What can I offer that they would value?”.
Common services are offered everywhere.
Uncommon services require training.
Rare services require a lifetime dedication.
Roll their Virtues on d12+d6.

COMMON
Servant: 2GD
Single duty with little expertise
Guide: 4GD
Handaxe (d6), javelin (d6), local knowledge
Sentry: 3GD
Billhook (d10 long), little appetite for combat

UNCOMMON
Herbalist: 2GD
Knows treatments, not cures
Soldier-at-Arms: 6GD
A2 (helm, shield)
Spear (d6 hefty), shield (d4), battle worn
Archer: 3GD
Shortbow (d6 long)

RARE
Sage: 2GD
Holds immense knowledge in a particular area of expertise
Alchemist: 2GD
Creates poisons or quasi-medicinal potions
Sellsword: 7GD
A4 (coat, plates, helm, shield)
Longsword (2d8 hefty), shield (d4)
Generally only agrees to fights that they are confident they can win

REALMS
• The world is fractured into petty Realms, each ruled from a Seat of Power.
• Smaller Holdings are walled settlements tended by Vassals, guarded by Knights.
• Most that lies between is wilderness.

MYTHS
• Stories that became truths, or are destined to come to pass.
• Nobody agrees on the details, but every version is true in some way.
• There’s no such thing as “just a myth”.

ROLES
• Most fall into one of four roles: Vassal, Vagabond, Knight, or Seer. A web of seniority exists within and between each.
• Vassals serve a ruler, typically a Knight, in return for protection.
• Vagabonds roam, working for and protecting only themselves.

SEERS
• Those who understand the nature of Myth enough to glimpse into our future.
• Their visions grant legitimacy and direction to a Knight’s quest.
• They know when a Squire is ready to become a Knight, and when a Knight is ready to seek the City.

KNIGHTS
• Those who take the Oath are held in esteem, but expectations burden them.
• They rely on their arms, but are expected to know the customs of peace.
• Usually one Knight holds each title, passed on in retirement or death.

FAITH
• Some believe there is truth in the sky: the stars, moon, sun, positions, and motions.
• Some look to nature: the turn of seasons, the sound of trees, the wisdom of beasts.
• Some believe the sacred stories that weave into Myths, guiding us to the City.